Spec review for @fluentui/react-textarea (#21898)
microsoft/fluentui: packages/react-textarea/Spec.md

  - `Material UI` and `v8` use the `TextField` control and added a variant `multiline` as follows: `<TextField multiline defaultValue="Default Value" />`
  - `Ant Design` uses the `TextArea` subcomponent as follows: `<Input.TextArea placeholder="Text Area" />`

#### TextArea in v8

- `Textfield` component with `multiline` property. When the `multiline` property is set to true, it is rendered as a `textarea`.
- Has descriptions, label, error message, and handles maximum character count.

#### TextArea in v0

- Doesn't have `label` prop.
- Handles maximum character count.

## Sample Code

```tsx
<TextArea
  className="textAreaClassName"
  id="textarea-1"
  defaultValue="This is a TextArea"
  onChange={(ev, data) => console.log(data.value)}
/>
```

## Variants

- Visual variants
  - `Filled Darker`: TextArea has a gray background and no outline.
  - `Filled Lighter`: TextArea has a white background and no outline.
  - `Underline`: TextArea has a gray background and a line on the bottom.
  - `Outline`: TextArea has a white background, outline, and a line on the bottom.
- Behavior variants
  - `Disabled`: TextArea has a gray background, gray text, outline, and interaction is disabled.

>   - `Read Only`: TextArea has a gray background, gray outline, and typing is disabled.

Reviewer: Let's make a note that colors are from a default theme.

## API

### Component props:

```ts
type TextAreaProps = {
  /**
   * Which direction the TextArea is allowed to be resized.
   *
   * @defaultvalue none
   */
  resize?: 'none' | 'horizontal' | 'vertical' | 'both';

  /**
   * Size of the TextArea.
   *
   * @defaultvalue medium
   */
  size?: 'small' | 'medium' | 'large';

  /**
   * Styling the TextArea should use.
   *
   * @defaultvalue outline
   */

>   appearance?: 'outline' | 'underline' | 'filledDarker' | 'filledLighter';

Reviewer 2: We should opt for kebab-case for consistency.

```suggestion
  appearance?: 'outline' | 'underline' | 'filled-darker' | 'filled-lighter';
```

Reviewer: @andrefcdias It also not aligned in other components (`Input`, `Select`):

https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/blob/3f3ef91846e63a345d9acba0e129656612d79b40/packages/react-select/src/components/Select/Select.types.ts#L36
https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/blob/3f3ef91846e63a345d9acba0e129656612d79b40/packages/react-input/src/components/Input/Input.types.ts#L57

Would you mind to create an issue for this problem?

  /**
   * The value of the TextArea.
   */
  value?: string;

  /**
   * The default value of the TextArea.
   */

>   defaultValue?: string;

Reviewer 2: Can't `value` be leveraged to provide a `defaultValue`? What would this defer from it?

Reviewer 3: `defaultValue` and `value` are mutually exclusive. `defaultValue` is used when you want an [uncontrolled input](https://reactjs.org/docs/uncontrolled-components.html). `value` is for controlled inputs.

Author: I'll add a comment mentioning it in the description.

  /**
   * Callback for when the user changes the value.
   */

>   onChange?: (ev: React.FormEvent<HTMLTextAreaElement>, data: TextAreaOnChangeData) => void;

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense for us to explicitly define this? It's already part of the textarea's API

Reviewer: Yes, as the signature is different: `onChange` on `textarea` has a single param.

Reviewer 3: @sopranopillow can you change the type of the event to `React.ChangeEvent`?

};

type TextAreaOnChangeData = {
  value: string;
};
```

> The auto-resize feature is known to be unstable from v8 and tricky to implement. [As mentioned by ecraig12345](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/pull/21898#discussion_r816418917), we've been trying prioritize getting the components ready for production and may have to leave out some features for the initial version.

Reviewer 4: _nit:_

```suggestion
The auto-resize feature is known to be unstable from v8 and tricky to implement. [As mentioned by ecraig12345](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/pull/21898#discussion_r816418917), we've been trying to prioritize getting the components ready for production and may have to leave out some features for the initial version.
```

> The auto-resize feature is known to be unstable from v8 and tricky to implement. [As mentioned by ecraig12345](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/pull/21898#discussion_r816418917), we've been trying prioritize getting the components ready for production and may have to leave out some features for the initial version.

Reviewer: Autosize feature is tricky for true, from my past experience it's better to have compatibility with third party libraries that handle it properly. For example, https://github.com/Andarist/react-textarea-autosize.

`TextArea` will have a single root slot that will be `<textarea/>`.

> The design spec mentions a character count, error message, and label which will be left out for now.

Reviewer 4: I would say 

```suggestion
The design spec mentions a character count, error message, and label which will be left out until further discussion.
```

since we don't know if they will ever be added to the component as the design review has not happened yet.

## Structure

**Public**

```tsx
<TextArea
  className="textAreaClassName"

>   style={{ background: 'blue' }}

Reviewer 4: _nit:_ I'd personally remove the style here as we don't want people to look at this and think it's the way they should style their components (vs our preferred approach with `makeStyles`

```suggestion
```

  id="textarea-1"
  value="This is a TextArea"
  onChange={(ev, data) => console.log(data.value)}
/>
```

**Internal**

```tsx
<slots.root {...slotProps.root}></slots.root>
```

**DOM** - how the component will be rendered as HTML elements

```html

> <textarea id="textarea-1" style="background: blue" className="textAreaClassName" value="This is a TextArea"></textarea>

Reviewer 4: If you remove the `style` above, you should also remove it here:

```suggestion
<textarea id="textarea-1" className="textAreaClassName" value="This is a TextArea"></textarea>
```

```

## Migration

See [MIGRATION.md](MIGRATION.md).

## Behaviors

_Explain how the component will behave in use, including:_

- Component States
  - Rest
  - Hover
  - Pressed: Apply focus border animation.
  - Focussed: Apply thick blue line on the bottom border.

> Interaction will be handled by native element.

Reviewer 4: Since this part seems to be missing we should probably add a TODO here or open a separate issue to go back and add it.

## Accessibility

- User should provide a label since there is no built-in label for TextArea.
- If no label is used, `aria-label` or `aria-labelledby` should be provided by the user.

> - Screen reader will be handled by native component.

Reviewer 4: _nit:_
```suggestion
- Screen reader behavior will be handled by using the native `<textarea>` element.
```

## Background

> `TextArea` is a text input field that does not depend on the `<input/>` element.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
`TextArea` is a multi-line text input field that uses the `<textarea>` element.
```

| [Grommet](https://v2.grommet.io/textarea)                                        | `TextArea`                      |

- Most libraries have their own `TextArea` component while others make it a variant of another component.
  - `React Bootstrap` uses as with `FormControl` as follows: `<FormControl as="textarea" />`
  - `Material UI` and `v8` use the `TextField` control and added a variant `multiline` as follows: `<TextField multiline defaultValue="Default Value" />`
  - `Ant Design` uses the `TextArea` subcomponent as follows: `<Input.TextArea placeholder="Text Area" />`

#### TextArea in v8

- `Textfield` component with `multiline` property. When the `multiline` property is set to true, it is rendered as a `textarea`.
- Has descriptions, label, error message, and handles maximum character count.

#### TextArea in v0

- Doesn't have `label` prop.
- Handles maximum character count.

## Sample Code

```tsx
<TextArea
  className="rootClassName"
  style={{ background: 'blue' }}
  id="textarea-1"
  defaultValue="This is a TextArea"
  onChange={(ev, data) => console.log(data.value)}
  textArea={{ className: 'textAreaClassName', style: { color: 'green' } }}
/>
```

## Variants

> - TextArea has six variants:

Reviewer 5: I think it might be helpful to distinguish between appearance and behavior variants.

  - `Filled Darker`: TextArea has a gray background and no outline.
  - `Filled Lighter`: TextArea has a white background and no outline.
  - `Underline`: TextArea has a gray background and a line on the bottom.
  - `Outline`: TextArea has a white background, outline, and a line on the bottom.
  - `Disabled`: TextArea has a gray background, gray text, outline, and interaction is disabled.
  - `Read Only`: TextArea has a gray background, gray outline, and typing is disabled.

## API

### Component props:

```ts
type TextAreaProps = {
  /**
   * Display inline instead of block.
   *
   * @defaultvalue false
   */

>   inline?: boolean;

Reviewer 3: We haven't finalized this yet but based on the [input coherence work](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/issues/21809#issuecomment-1050158756) this prop should be dropped and `TextArea` should have a display of `inline-block`, `inline-flex` or `inline-grid`.

  /**
   * Which direction the TextArea is allowed to be resized.
   *
   * @defaultvalue off
   */
  resize?: 'off' | 'horizontal' | 'vertical' | 'both';

  /**
   * Direction the TextArea should resize.
   *
   * @defaultvalue off
   */

>   autoResize?: 'off' | 'top' | 'bottom';

Reviewer 5: This turns out to be really tricky to implement properly (there are known bugs with the v8 version), so I'd prefer to leave it out of the initial implementation if possible.

That's a general principle we've been trying to follow for new components: if a feature is hard to implement well and not immediately necessary to product scenarios, leave it out of the initial version.

Author: Sounds good, I'll remove it and add a note about it.

  /**
   * Size of the TextArea.
   *
   * @defaultvalue medium
   */
  size?: 'small' | 'medium' | 'large';

  /**
   * Styling the TextArea should use.
   *
   * @defaultvalue outline
   */
  appearance?: 'outline' | 'underline' | 'filledDarker' | 'filledLighter';

  /**
   * The value of the TextArea.
   */
  value?: string;

  /**
   * The default value of the TextArea.
   */
  defaultValue?: string;

  /**
   * Callback for when the user changes the value.
   */

>   onChange?: (ev: React.FormEvent<HTMLTextAreaElement>, data: { value: string }) => void;

Reviewer 3: To be consistent with other controls the `data` argument should by of an exported type called `TextAreaOnChangeData`.

};
```

> As with most form controls, `TextArea` will have the `textarea` element as the primary element a wrapper (root). This means that `ref` will be passed directly to the `textarea` with its native props.

Reviewer 5: Guessing this is what you meant?
```suggestion
As with most form controls, `TextArea` will have the `textarea` element as the primary slot (with a wrapper `root` element for styling). This means that `ref` will be passed directly to the `textarea` with its native props.
```

Though for TextArea, since it doesn't have contentBefore/contentAfter like Input, it might be possible to have the textarea itself as the root element--unless we're concerned about that creating limitations with future features we might want to add to the core component that could require a wrapper.

Reviewer 3: The primary vs root slot thing is likely to be a point of confusion for users but I believe the pattern is used in all our input controls so it might be worth using the pattern for all input controls as a rule for the sake of consistency.

Author: After working in the implementation, I realized that it will need a root wrapper since `<textarea />` cannot have children. The design spec uses a custom focus indicator(the same one as input) that will require and `::after` pseudo-element and will not show because of this reason. I've updated the Spec to show the wrapper but let me know if you have any other ideas, I tried a few things but nothing seems to work.

The design spec mentions a character count, error message, and label which will be left out for now.

## Structure

**Public**

```tsx
<TextArea

>   className="rootClassName"

Reviewer 3: I think this will need some work because the `textArea` slot is the primary slot so className will be applied to it which is different from your proposed DOM output below.

```ts
type TextAreaProps = {
  /**
   * How shall the TextArea be displayed.
   *
   * @defaultvalue 'inline-block'
   */

>   display?: 'inline-block' | 'inline-flex' | 'inline-grid';

Reviewer 3: I'm realizing I worded my last comment on this poorly. This prop should be removed entirely to minimize our component APIs, imo. 

The default UA display style for all input controls is `inline-block` so when we apply styles to our components we should align with this and use `inline-block/flex/grid` but not expose a prop to control this on the component.

Ideally users should be able to control the layout of controls like this via a parent container with flexbox or CSS grid. They can also override our styles if necessary.

  /**
   * Callback for when the user changes the value.
   */
  onChange?: (ev: React.FormEvent<HTMLTextAreaElement>, data: TextAreaOnChangeData) => void;
};

type TextAreaOnChangeData = {
  value: string;
};
```

The auto-resize feature is known to be unstable from v8 and tricky to implement. [As mentioned by ecraig12345](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/pull/21898#discussion_r816418917), we've been trying prioritize getting the components ready for production and may have to leave out some features for the initial version.

`TextArea` will have a single root slot that will be `<textarea/>`.

> The design spec mentions a caracter count, error message, and label which will be left out for now.

Reviewer 3: typo
```suggestion
The design spec mentions a character count, error message, and label which will be left out for now.
```

The auto-resize feature is known to be unstable from v8 and tricky to implement. [As mentioned by ecraig12345](https://github.com/microsoft/fluentui/pull/21898#discussion_r816418917), we've been trying to prioritize getting the components ready for production and may have to leave out some features for the initial version.

> `TextArea` will have two props:

Reviewer 3: I think this should be slots.
```suggestion
`TextArea` has two slots:
```

> - `textarea` which will be in charge of handling everything, except the focus indicator.

Reviewer 3: What do you think about:
```suggestion
- `textarea` the primary slot that handles all `Textarea` behavior, except the focus indicator.
```

> - `root` which will act as a wrapper to be able to use an after pseudo-element for the focus indicator. This wrapper is needed since textarea cannot have children, therefore `::after` cannot be used.

Reviewer 3: What do you think about
```suggestion
- `root` acts as a wrapper to allow a pseudo-element for the focus indicator. This wrapper is needed since textarea cannot have children, therefore `::after` cannot be used.
```
